# Scale-Offset codec

Defines an `array -> array` codec that encodes an array in a new data type after applying an offset, 
followed by a scaling, to the array values. This transformation is commonly used to map floating-point values into the support range of an integer data type, which achieves a lossy form of compression.

This codec only supports arrays with integer and floating-point data types.

## Codec metadata

This codec is declared in metadata as a JSON object with the following structure:

| Field | Type | Required |
| -     | -    | -        |
| [`name`](#name)  | string | yes |
| [`configuration`](#configuration) | object | yes |

### Name

The value of the `name` field MUST be the string `"scale-offset"`.

### Configuration

The value of the `configuration` field is a JSON object with the following structure:

| Field | Type | Required |
| -     | -    | -        |
| [`offset`](#offset)  | number | yes |
| [`scale`](#scale) | number | yes |
| [`astype`](#astype) | Zarr V3 data type metadata | yes |

Additional keys are reserved for future versions of this codec. Metadata with additional keys MUST be treated as invalid by readers.

### offset

The value of the `offset` field is a scalar that defines the quantity added to input values during encoding. This value MUST be a JSON number.

### scale

The value of the `scale` field is a scalar that defines the quantity multiplied with input values during encoding, after they have been added to `offset`. This value MUST be a JSON number.

### astype

The value of the `astype` field defines the data type of the array returned by the encoding procedure, and the data type of the array provided as input for the decoding procedure. This value MUST be Zarr V3 data type metadata.

## Algorithm

### Encoding

Given an input array `I`, an output array `O` with data type `astype` is generated by the following routine:

```
arr = I + offset
arr = arr * scale
O = cast(arr, astype)
```

### Decoding

The decoding routine inverts the encoding routine, i.e.:

```
# I is the input to the *decoding* procedure
arr = cast(I, dtype) # `dtype` is the data type of the array passed as input to the encoding routine.
arr = arr / scale
O = arr - offset
```

Note that the input data type must support multiplication, division, addition, and subtraction.

## Example

The following snippet of array metadata demonstrates the metadata for the `scale-offset` codec.

```json
{
    "data_type": "float32",
    "codecs": [
        {
        "name": "scale-offset",
        "configuration": {
            "offset": 5,
            "scale": 10,
            "astype": "float32"
            }
        },
        "bytes"
    ]
}
```

## Implementation notes

This codec converts arrays from one data type to another. Data type conversion is a potentially lossy procedure, and routines for converting data types often take parameters which are not presently modeled by this codec. Users of this codec should ensure that readers and writers agree on data type conversion behavior before relying on consistency between those readers and writers.

Implementations should use casting routines that avoid introducing a bias in the output data. For example, when converting from a floating-point data type to an integer data type, values should be rounded to the nearest integer value prior to the integer data type conversion.

## Legacy `numcodecs.fixedscaleoffset` codec

The `scale-offset` codec described here is based on a Zarr V3 codec called `numcodecs.fixedscaleoffset`, which was defined operationally as a direct translation of the Zarr-V2-compatible `fixedscaleoffset` codec into Zarr V3. That `fixedscaleoffset` codec was itself defined operationally by an implementation (`numcodecs.FixedScaleOffset`) in the Numcodecs library.

The `scale-offset` codec is designed to completely supersede the `numcodecs.fixedscaleoffset` codec. That being said, authors of implementations of the `scale-offset` codec may wish to support the `numcodecs.fixedscaleoffset` codec, e.g. by treating it as a read-only alias for the `scale-offset` codec. Thus the `numcodecs.fixedscaleoffset` codec will be defined here, with instructions for mapping the semantics of that codec to the `scale-offset` codec.

### Codec metadata

The `numcodecs.fixedscaleoffset` codec defined the following metadata:

| Field | Type | Required |
| -     | -    | -        |
| [`id`](#id) | string | yes |
| [`offset`](#offset-1)  | number | yes |
| [`scale`](#scale-1) | number | yes |
| [`astype`](#astype-1) | Zarr V2 data type metadata | yes |
| [`dtype`](#dtype-1) | Zarr V2 data type metadata | yes |

#### id

The value of the `id` field MUST be the string `"numcodecs.fixedscaleoffset"`

#### offset

The value of the `offset` field is a scalar that defines the quantity subtracted from input values during encoding. This value MUST be a JSON number.

#### scale

The value of the `scale` field is a scalar that defines the quantity multiplied with input values during encoding. This value MUST be a JSON number.

#### astype

The value of the `astype` field defines the data type of the array returned by the encoding procedure, and the data type of the array provided as input for the decoding procedure. This value MUST be Zarr V2 data type metadata.

#### dtype

The value of the `dtype` field defines the data type of the array given as input to the encoding procedure, and the data type of the array returned by the decoding procedure. This value MUST be Zarr V2 data type metadata.

Note that in Zarr V3, a `dtype` field is not needed because the data type of the input to an array-array codec is determined by its location in the `codecs` metadata. Zarr V2 chunk encoding did not have such guarantees, and so the `dtype` field was necessary for the `fixedscaleoffset` codec implemented in Numcodecs.

### Algorithm

#### Encoding

Given an input array `I`, an output array `O` with data type [`astype`](#astype-1) is generated by the following procedure:

```
arr = I - offset # note that offset is *subtracted*
arr = arr * scale
arr = round(arr) # round to nearest integer
O = cast(arr, astype)
```

#### Decoding

Given an input array `I`, an output array `O` with data type [`dtype`](#dtype-1) is generated by the following procedure, which inverts the [encoding procedure](#encoding-1):

```
arr = cast(I, dtype)
arr = arr / scale
O = arr + offset # note that offset is *added*
```

### Conversion to `scale-offset`

To generate an equivalent `scale-offset` codec definition from `numcodecs.fixedscaleoffset` codec metadata, apply the following changes:
- multiply the `offset` value by -1. In the `scale-offset` codec algorithm, the offset is added in the encoding path, while in `numcodecs.fixedscaleoffset` the offset is subtracted in the encoding path.
- convert the `astype` field from Zarr V2 data type metadata to Zarr V3 data type metadata. Note that Zarr V2 data type metadata could declare endianness, but Zarr V3 data type metadata currently cannot, so this conversion might be lossy.
- ensure that the `dtype` field, once interpreted as Zarr V3 data type metadata, is consistent with the data type of the array passed as input to the `scale-offset` codec.

## References

The `scale-offset` codec is based on the `FixedScaleOffset` class defined in the Numcodecs library. See https://numcodecs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/filter/fixedscaleoffset.html for more information.

## Change log

No changes yet.

## Current maintainers

* [zarr-python core development team](https://github.com/orgs/zarr-developers/teams/python-core-devs)
